I'll ask you first of all, Warren, just to give us a little bit about your background,
kind of how you grew up and what might have influenced you to be a writer and why a science
fiction writer.
When I was 11 years old, we moved to Texas and at that time I had been writing a little
poetry for a couple years.
And the first summer we moved to Texas, we didn't know anyone and didn't know any place
to go and my father parked me and my brother at a boys club, Panther Boys Club in Fort
Worth, Texas.
And it was a blockbuster summer for Texas.
I mean, they were trying to bust the top out of the thermometer.
There was no air conditioning in the Panther Boys Club.
We used to go down the airfare, cut off blue jeans, shorts, no shirt, no shoes, no socks,
brown bag lunch and a quarter for a Coke, right?
And that was it.
And the only cool place in the building was the north side of the building in the library,
which had a cement floor.
It was the only cool spot in the building and I loved to read and went in the library
and all along the bottom shelf in the library was Tom Swift and Tom Swift, Jr.
And that summer I read them all, went back to school in the fall, discovered Space Cadet
by Robert Heinlein and I was hooked.
Absolutely hooked.
And then science fiction reading formed probably on the average about 50% of my recreational
reading for the rest of my life to this stage anyway.
I started trying to write stories that may or may not have been science fiction or horror
or cult after about the seventh grade when a teacher read in two parts Edgaron Poe's
Cascofa Montillado.
And for years I turned out terribly Poe-esque, grotesque, horror, gore stories.
The words weren't any good but which were great fun, which were great fun to turn in
in class.
You know, you have to write, the teacher would say write a page of description and I write
to write this lurid scene of grotesque, you know, body in the grave, Edgaron Poe description.
I guess it was great early training for doing that.
I didn't start trying seriously to write science fiction until about 1977, 1978 and thought,
you know, I've been reading so much that I really ought to try writing some of it.
I had written a war novel which is unpublishable.
It's written in seven different styles.
But it was the first novel that I wrote so I decided to write this science fiction novel.
And discovered how little I knew about, intuitively, about the storytelling process.
That the writing had always been very easy for me but how little, intuitively, I knew
about the storytelling process.
And so I forced myself to finish that terrible book.
It has an abbreviated ending.
I finally decided that, you know, the bomb would blow up and they would all disappear
because I couldn't cope with them anymore.
But I forced myself to finish it.
And then I tried my hand at some fantasy because I was reading a fair amount of fantasy at
the time and decided that I really liked science fiction better.
So when I got the opportunity to quit my full-time job and only have to work part-time and write
for a year, which was a contract my wife and I agreed to, then I said, you know, I'm going
to give it my best shot in science fiction.
And this is the genre that I've loved so I might as well do everything I can to make
it work.
And that's where the Windhover books came from.
Okay, I've got to ask.
It's the Windhover books.
The hero's name is Gerard Manley.
I'm not an English major but...
Don't hit me.
You know.
So...
The clues are pretty evident.
Yes.
That slightly reminiscent of something.
And is this...
This was obviously delivered.
Are you interested in Hopkins, the poet?
Yeah, it's my left-handed salute to the old man.
I mean, I think he was a poet who was probably a hundred years ahead of his time.
He's not one of those poets that you walk around reciting verses to at people's and
being parties.
But I think he did marvelous...
I think he took marvelous chances with the language and marvelous chances with poetry
and some of it is just, you know, it's breathtaking.
But no one's going to read a tribute to Gerard Manley Hopkins.
So when I sat down to do the story, I had already decided that I was going to name the
ship Windhover, which is his most famous poem, the Windhover.
And it just seemed, you know, the natural thing to do, the name the character Gerard
Manley, especially since he is interested in poetry, right?
And then in the second book, when Gerard finds himself at the end of his road and thinks
this is going to be it, it's going to be all over, he writes a poem to GM, which is himself,
right?
But it's also the poem to Gerard Manley Hopkins.
And it echoes the language of the Windhover.
Hopkins the Windhover.
It echoes that language and asks some of the same questions only from Gerard's point of
view rather than from Hopkins' point of view.
So yeah, it's all very intentional.
I mean, with 54-hour minor in English, it's hard to be unintentional about things like
that.
This is kind of a cheap shot.
I read that.
Theokong to cheaper ones.
Yeah.
What about, you know, all the 15-year-old kids that read for four hours and toss the
book, you know, I guess basically the question is to what audience do you write or do you
write for yourself?
I think it was Raymond Chandler, but I'm not sure who said that I write first to entertain
myself and hope that others are entertained.
I had a certain audience awareness in that when I went back and did the second draft,
I simplified the language somewhat from the original draft because I thought I had gotten
too carried away.
But I didn't write it thinking of a specific audience.
Whereas, in the book that Ralph and I wrote together, we were aiming in a sense at an
audience that starts with those 12, 13, 14-year-olds.
We wanted to pick up the space opera buffs and then also write things for, you know,
the older audience at the same time, trying to do both things at the same time.
And it was a way of stretching to be able to do both, to keep the language simple and
yet to deal with complex ideas and keep the story moving so that if you didn't want to
deal with the complex ideas, you could just go through the story.
But for those books, I really didn't have an audience in mind.
It was just a story that I had been thinking about for eight or nine months and I wanted
to tell.
And that seemed more important.
And then when I made the decision about how to tell the story, I knew without deliberating
on a great deal that I had limited my audience.
But I thought, well, I'm willing to take the chance because I figured I needed something
to break into the market and I think you have to take chances to do that.
It was much appreciated.
I really enjoyed it.
I'm glad that you stuck to your guns.
This seems like as good a place as any to ask this question on the back of an image
of voices.
There's a quote from Anne McCaffrey out on Onaborn's ambitions for four years.
So what was your relationship with Anne McCaffrey and had you corresponded with her?
I was a book salesman for Ballantine.
Ballantine Delray did the McCaffrey Dragon books, among others.
And when she did the first promotion tour around the country for the hardcover edition
of White Dragon, I cornered the Delray direct salesman and said, if you don't get her into
some of my wholesale accounts, you know, I'm going to break your knees.
Besides, I want to meet her.
I mean, there's other reasons besides.
So I got her into, I think, three of the accounts and then we took her to the airport together
and her plane was an hour and a half late.
So we sat in the bar in the airport drinking Coors beer, which is one of her favorites
and she can't get in Ireland and listening to Annie Tell Stories, which is a marvelous
experience in and of itself.
When she came back the following year for the paperback tour for White Dragon, my wife
and I picked her up at the airport, took her to the hotel in Dallas, which was on fire
at the time.
So that was all very exciting.
She was extremely tired.
It was the 23rd day of a 28 day tour and night, you know, in 31 cities or something like that.
And she was beginning.
So we ended up staying until like one or two o'clock in the morning because she couldn't
sleep and just talking and chatting.
And then I took her around all the next day with a case of Coors beer iced down in the
back and about three melons all diced up because you can't get fresh melon in Ireland.
Either right.
So she munched on melon and drank Coors beer all day while we toured Dallas and Fort Worth
and visited bookstores and radio stations and developed a gram rapport and ended up
at the airport drinking Coors beer and having a wonderful time.
So we corresponded then fairly regularly.
I say fairly three or four times a year after that.
And after I finished the book and Banna McBaudet, they said, you know, who do you know?
And I said, well, the author I know best is Emma Caffrey.
So I asked her, I said, you know, would you, would you read it?
And she said, yes.
And then she said those wonderful things.
And I don't remember anything for about a week after getting that letter, you know,
it's floating.
Yes, yes, yes.
It was, Annie's letter was, was as much of a high as the sale.
Right.
Because it was some kind of confirmation that I had in fact done it right.
It was as much of a high as the sale was itself.
Right.
The format that you use in the two books is like a diary.
And then you've got this internal dialogue.
How did you develop that approach?
Years of talking to myself.
That's that's really it.
I mean, I know a lot of writers who talk to themselves, who when they sit at the typewriter,
talk, carry on conversations and go down the road by themselves in the car and carry on
conversations with themselves, work out problems that way.
And I thought, there's so much of me in Gerard, although there's a great deal of Gerard
that isn't me, there's so much of me in him that it just seemed natural, given what had
happened to him.
So let him do this same thing, except to make it a little more formal and have him address
himself as self.
Part of that is part of how that happened to him is explained in the third book.
What brought him to that point where he really began to talk to himself.
That's how he got that quote unquote self reliance.
Right.
Is explained in the third book because of what happened to him in the missing 10 years.
I can't give away the plot now.
OK, because the next question I had the quote from page 200 in this one.
I don't know exactly when I started talking to self and the second person, but by the
time I ascended from puberty, the habit was firmly set and accepted.
I was going to ask you if that was autobiographical.
Yeah, probably, probably.
I would catch myself doing it sometimes aloud and sometimes just to myself to the point
where I no longer thought about it.
But only usually instead of saying self, although I say self now, which I didn't
used to do after having written the book.
Now I say self.
I don't know.
And it's life imitating art.
But it's usually Norwood.
You dummy.
It's Norwood this and Norwood that.
And that's how I do.
But I carry on the same kinds of conversation that Gerard did, although I don't ask
Norwood to do the same kinds of things that he has self.
I kind of know the answer to this, but we'll get it on tape anyway.
The two books have a lot of poetry.
So apparently you write poetry yourself.
And I was going to ask you if maybe since it's difficult to sell poetry or to
publish it in a lot of places, maybe this kind of lets you put some of your
published somewhere.
Oh, yes.
Yes.
One of the motives up a brandy that in the very beginning was to bootleg the
poetry into the story.
In fact, it was the tenderfoot cycle of poems, which.
Helped me formulate how I wanted to put the story together.
And all the tenderfoot poems aren't in there, fortunately.
But.
Part of that was part of what I wanted to do in the books, because I thought.
Again, that was something else that there was.
I was taking enough chances.
I thought, I'll take one more.
I'll go ahead and try this and see what happens.
I've been writing poetry since I was nine.
So I obviously believe in it in some form or another.
So I thought, why not do that and see if we can make it work?
And I was very fortunate and found an editor who believed in it after having
talked to several others who did not believe in it at all.
They won't know if it's Wussy's time.
No, no, no.
In fact, Judy Lindell Ray, who I had known because I worked for Ballantyne,
had read the book.
She was the first one to read the manuscript.
And she wrote me this long, two-page detail letter about why she hated the book.
And.
It didn't.
It didn't affect the way I felt about Judy Lind.
But she said, you know, you really just put this in the bottom door, right?
Another one.
Well, of course, I couldn't do that.
But what I did was eventually I took Judy Lind's letter back out of the door and
read it and reread it and reread it.
And then in the query letters, trying to get people to read the manuscript, took
all those things that she hated and wrote them as if they were a list of positive
attributes for the book.
And so in effect, Judy Lind helped me sell the book, right?
She taught me, you know, she gave me the information I needed on how to sell the
book.
So I took that whole list of things that she didn't like, said, this is what it is.
And this is great.
And that's what got Karen Haas had banned them to read it.
And she liked all those things that Judy Lind didn't.
So it worked.
So I have to thank Judy Lindell Ray for helping me sell that book.
We talked to Ardith Mayer last night and she said that she wrote poetry for many
years.
She feels very strongly that having written poetry really helped her prose
writing because of the economy of words and that sort of thing.
Do you, has that helped you with your prose?
Didn't think that experience bright poetry.
I think so because if you write poetry regularly and try constantly to improve
it and you're constantly working with the language, you're trying to constantly
trying to squeeze from the language as much meaning as possible.
So it makes you extremely cognizant of words and their meanings and their subtleties
and shades of meanings.
I think that it can, that writing poetry can also hurt your prose.
I think that you can in fact get too poetic.
You're trying to put too much in.
You're trying to make your prose too poetic.
I think it's, I marvel at some of the stuff that Gene Wolf writes.
I mean, I think some of his prose just blows me away.
But at the same time, I think that sometimes he sticks with a level of writing that is
almost too poetic for the part of the story he's trying to tell that instead of
doing it in rhythms, he's so caught up in that rhythm, so caught up in that level,
that poetic level that he can't bring it down to a faster, cleaner action scene
where you get out of that and you sweep the reader along and then pull them back up
to another poetic height.
And so I think, you know, this is not to criticize Gene Wolf, but it's to say that
I think that because he is a poet and because he is so poetically involved with
the language that it has detracted a little bit from what he might have
otherwise done with the story.
Of course, all this is envy on my part because if I could write prose like Gene
Wolf's writing, I would be a very happy man.
I was reading the books, especially an image of voices because George
R. Rol changed quite a bit in the second book, but it was reminisce,
the situation of reminisce of a riteef, Lommer's riteef.
You read the riteef.
Years ago, yes.
Years ago.
And I tried not, I tried not to make Gerard not like riteef, right?
While still, you know, maintaining that, you know, intergalactic
diplomat role, I tried to make him a very different kind of diplomat.
But there were times, in fact, in the first draft, there are sections where it
got a little riteef-like kind of unconsciously.
And then I had to go back, so gee, I think I read this somewhere before.
I did, I did.
And then you have to go back and clean things up.
Pete, there were, they weren't characters, but the computers were, were
a pretty big element in the book, which I think is real.
I think the computers are going to be that important in the future, but you
seemed at home with computers and the jargon and that sort of thing.
So are you a computer freak?
The interesting part of that is that when I wrote those books, all my
knowledge of computers came from books, right?
I had no real firsthand experience with computers.
It was all from books and a lot of reading about them and what they could
do and what they couldn't do, what the latest developments were.
Having a year after I finished the third book, I now have my own home computer
and I do my word processing and I think I would have a more difficult time now
pulling it off the same way because I know too many specifics that I didn't
know before, right?
In a sense, I was safer with the generalities and approaching it that way.
And I was safe from the language and syntax of talking about computers.
And I've had several, one of the most pleasing things is reactions is I've
had several computer programmers and program analysts tell me that they
really enjoyed the computer part, which means that I did my job as a writer.
I got through that part of it and yet I didn't slow everybody down with the
technical ease.
So I made it believable for the people who knew and understood and I also
made it acceptable to the people who didn't and who aren't comfortable with it.
Are there any modern day precedents for the linguistic analysis by computers
and the poetry analysis by computers?
Very crude ones at this stage of the game.
But there's been work that's been done on that.
Several universities have done experimental programming with programming
computers to write poetry, programming computers to translate poetry.
And it's all at a very crude level.
So my extrapolation of that is a big stretch.
But I thought given the progress of technology that in 7000 years it seemed
reasonable that we'd figure out how to do it.
I might just do that.
Okay.
And whenever Manly was in the Fed Center rehab, he teaches a little class in
writing.
And the reason was that it was to help the guests put some of their thoughts and
feelings down on paper for therapy.
Is writing kind of therapeutic to you?
Yeah, it's a form of therapy.
It's a form of catharsis.
It's a way of exercising your own demons.
You get to take this demon and give it to someone else and make them deal with it.
And then you get it out of your own head and you don't have to worry about it.
And then if it gets loose with them and runs over them, that's okay, because it's
them, it's not you.
And so yeah, it's always been that way for me.
Poetry was that way especially because it's an extremely emotional form when
you're young.
And so it allows you to get, allows you a place to let go of those emotions where
otherwise you might not have a socially acceptable outlet.
So it's always been that for me.
Has there ever been any precedent for psychologists using writing for people
that have been through bad situations to exercise their demons like?
Oh, yes.
Yes.
In fact, I participated in a course that was very, that was partially based on
an idea at the Federal Correctional Institute in Fort Worth, where we got all
these minimum security prisoners to work out some of their demons and creative
writing.
And the scene, the whole thing on pleasant when Gerard is in the rehab center is
based on some things that we did when I was down at Fort Hood, where they had a
little program for long term rehabilitation, rehabilitation patients in the
hospital at Fort Hood, where they were doing some of that.
And then I got to participate in a little bit of that program.
And that's where the idea came from.
Okay.
Flexing the war, Delta, I guess I should, is it Shereel?
I called her Shereel.
That's, that's it.
That's it.
Okay.
Good.
I realized that that's the first time I'd ever pronounced that word aloud.
Flexing the war dealt a great deal with Shereel's pregnancy and I've been through
two pregnancies.
So it was very real.
And most science fiction books, I mean, you either use the auto woman or something
or it's no big deal, but it, but there was a lot of human, human emotion and love
and that sort of thing.
And I hadn't seen it before.
Have you been through first hand pregnancy?
I mean, it's very realistically.
Yes.
Through the, through the pregnancy and through a miscarriage before it.
So that I took all that and, you know, you write what you know.
And so I put that in there because those were, those were very important times
of my life when they happened.
I was there when my daughter was born in the delivery room and that's why we got,
you know, we got to have the, the big group scene when, when Serena is born.
And I thought, you know, everybody ought to get to share this experience
because it was really, it was really a lot of fun.
And I, one of those, again, one of those gratifying things is to have a fan come
up and say, you know, gee, I really liked, you know, female fans, especially.
You really got that down.
I really understand that our husbands come up and say, my wife was like
that when she was pregnant.
I mean, Joy makes a wonderful comment in there that he, you know, maybe women
change species when they're pregnant.
There's some biological basis for that.
I read that all after my wife.
My secretary, in fact, she looks to me for, for what can she read in science fiction?
Cause she's not well versed.
So I recommended these and told her it was a, it was really a love story,
especially saying, well, she was just amazed.
Science fiction could be a love story.
Oh, really?
And she's going to read it.
So I'm anxious to see her reaction to it.
Um, okay.
I have a comment.
So I'm going to, I'm going to, I say the series is a people story.
It's not a hardware story.
Uh, you don't, you don't explain your warps, uh, the ghosts, uh, how, why
there's so many cross fertile bipeds around us, where they're just there.
And we just accept that.
And then I have parenthetically my applause.
Um, do you consider, uh, okay.
Did you ever think about explaining these things or you just decide,
hang on, make this a science fiction book and we're not going to explain all
this shit, how the, how we do this and that people know it's a book.
So, yeah, I did what a great number of science fiction writers do.
And that is, I, I built on what had gone before.
And there was, there's, there's such a huge basis now of groundwork that has
been done for us that we don't have to spend a lot of time explaining how
this works and how that works.
And, you know, oh, actually this warp takes us through techie on space,
blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
We can just use keywords, uh, and key concepts and the reader has already
been grounded in that.
And then you can spend more time telling the story instead of having more
time, spend more time explaining all the, all the mechanical functions.
Uh, there's a hard science, there's a big hard science story that I really
want to write, but I don't think I have the skills yet as a writer to do it.
So I'm saving that one for when I'm, when I'm better trained in my craft.
Okay.
Manly also dreams a lot or so a lot of them, maybe flashbacks and things, but,
but there are dreams and he replaced the dream that wouldn't be nice to be able
to do that, to keep replaying and focusing on the details and he interprets them.
But do you dream a lot?
Did this, uh, this has happened to you?
I dreamed a great deal from the time I, well, from somewhere in the middle
of Vietnam, uh, until about six, seven years afterward.
And I think that's the major influence on George dreams.
Uh, and they were very vivid and they were very recallable in the same
way that he recalls them where I could, I could, they would start as fragments
when I woke up and then I could, I could pull them back.
I could bring more pieces back into the dream.
That kind of faded off after about six, seven years after I got back from Vietnam.
And I don't do nearly as much of it, but that's where it came from.
That, that process came from.
And then in Gerard's case, it's, it's, it's part of what he suspects.
And it's, it's, he's getting a mirror image of what was a prescient talent.
And his prescientism is in effect kind of turned around and giving him a
way to look back into his past warped by the mind wipers.
Okay.
Um, at this point, I'll ask you then, uh, how's the tape doing?
The, uh, the cover, uh, I, Gerard doesn't look like that to me.
No, captain space.
Get it.
The real is not right.
Except I noticed there's one detail that she didn't have this little, it looks
like after the fact penciled on tank top story.
Now I'm not an art critic.
What do you think that that might have been an add on a little, a little red tank top?
Cause otherwise she looks just, she has little stars and little skirt and all that,
but that looks like it might have been added.
So what, I liked, I liked Larkin's interpretation of Cherelle, but her
idea is interpretation of Gerard.
I mean Gerard, what little description you get.
He's getting a little pot belly and he's getting a little bald and he doesn't
look like captain space cadet, but when they showed me the original cover,
which did not have a little red tank top, I said, for my five years
experience in book hoe sailing, you're going to have a problem selling this
book because book hoe sailors are on the whole more conservative in their
buying habits than bookstores.
And they said, Oh no, no, no, don't worry about it.
And I said, you're going to have a problem.
They said, don't worry about it.
We want to hear it's too late to change it.
When one of the largest wholesalers in the country who had sold about 3,500
copies of the first book refused to order the second book, they literally
stopped the presses while the book was printed.
They hadn't bound it yet, but they had printed 90,000 covers.
They trashed 90,000 covers, pulled the artwork, put on this little red
acetate tank top, reshot the cover and reprinted it.
And then in order to go out and sell it to these people who had refused to
buy it, you know, originally they shot Xeroxes of it and the red acetate
turns black on the Xerox, of course.
So it looks like she's all covered up.
So everybody bought the book then and then they, when it came in and they,
and they put it out, so many people started looking at, you can see through
that.
So it's a rather bizarre story, but the things that happen on covers are bizarre.
Right.
The cover of the third book has nothing to do with the story.
And the woman looks just like, I mean, looks just like Sheryl,
except it's supposed to be Ferry Peg.
And here's the grand high muckety muck of Ribble Galaxy, you know, the
number one titular head of the whole place who never gets naked, except when
she gets in the bathtub, right?
Standing there on a loincloth and a halter top, right?
There's three?
No, two.
She only has two.
Yeah, she only has two.
Yeah.
Yeah, I've got it here.
Well, let's look at our radio.
Yeah, yeah.
We'll show that we, we'll hold this up to the microphone.
So all the whole radio audience can see what it looks like.
But it looks almost like Teresa in the face.
Wow.
Okay.
Did any, did any cover, would there accidentally be a dozen or so copies
without the little acetate tank top that got out?
No, there were some copies of the cover.
Right.
I have, I think I have three or four copies of the cover without the tank top.
So you have a hang on to those.
Yeah, but the best part was they, the bookstore at the University of Texas
in Arlington asked them for a blow up of the cover to do a big window display
because I used to work there and they give me a big promotion for each book.
And when they did the blow up, they did the original artwork without the tank top.
And when the manager of the store saw it, he said, we can't put that in the window,
right?
I mean, it's things like 24 by 36.
He said, we can't put this in the window.
So they took it back to the, to the, to the art department and they cut out a
little red acetate blouse and they just kind of slapped it on there and stuck it
in the window.
So I have, I have a blow up of the original.
Okay.
You, do you work part time now?
Is that for Bantam?
I know I used, I did until February.
I worked part time for Bantam.
Was there any coincidence that you worked for Bantam and Bantam published your novels?
No, no.
It, it might have helped in, in, in getting it read because when I wrote to Karen Haas
at Bantam, I noted, I told her that I was working part time for Bantam.
So it probably didn't hurt in getting it read, but she wouldn't have bothered if it,
just because I worked for Bantam.
It was nice working for Bantam.
When the books came out though, because you helped get distributed your own book.
I was putting books at the Osford, Worth airport.
So my book got on the bestseller rack and, you know, it's, you know, it's good.
You know, it was, it was great in terms of sales of the book.
I mean, we sold an enormous number of books at the DFW airport because we put them all
out there and mass numbers on the rack, which sells X number of books anyway.
And then I autographed every one of those crazy things and put little tags on there
to tell people that they were autographed.
He was telling me that he was, he was through the airport and saw the autographed book.
I wondered what, how they did happen.
There's another, there's an interesting, I guess it's a market employee.
And these books I had not seen before, maybe it's just because I haven't seen
that many varieties of books, but where you have excerpts from the next book in there.
Did you, did you have a hand in there?
No, no, that's Bantam.
Well, Bantam has been doing it for, for some number of years.
They will do excerpts from one book, like one Western and another Western.
Sometimes they will do one particular mainstream novel that they're pushing
hard, it's going to be a lead title they'll do in books for two or three months preceding.
They'll put a little excerpt in the back.
I don't know, I can't think off the top of my head of any other series where they've
done that same kind of thing.
But they just said, we're going to do it.
And I said, that's fine.
The only, my only objection is that those are never, they're never corrected.
They're never the corrected manuscript that they use.
So it's full of typos and all kinds of crazy things.
And they just stick it in the back.
It is, at least on the first one was called the Windhover trilogy.
And as George said, it's, I think, I don't think they ever did.
I think they always called it a series.
Okay. Yeah.
I called it a trilogy fool that I was.
I called it a trilogy because that's how I thought about it.
But they always called it a series.
Why did you decide to go on with another one?
But it's just necessary for.
Or is it Anne McCaffrey?
It's Anne McCaffrey's fault.
I'm not blaming on any.
She wrote after she, she has read all the books in manuscript now.
I went after she finished the third book.
She wrote me this long, long letter asking me this whole list of questions.
She said, you have answered all the main questions in the story.
I'm not objecting to that, but I want to know this and I want to know that.
I want to know this and I want to know that.
And are you ever going to talk about this?
And are you ever going to talk about that?
And she said, either write me a long letter back or write another book.
So I laughingly shared that letter with my editor and.
Started thinking about the answers to those questions, but it hadn't gotten
beyond that point until the first book started to sell really well.
And then my editor said, gee, you ought to think about the fourth book.
And I said, well, the only way I'll do a fourth book if it's the final book,
because I don't want an endless series.
If I can make this the final book and under these conditions, then I will,
I will write it and I will answer Annie's question.
So the fourth book is going to be to answer any questions.
I mean, that's what started the whole thing.
Dan McCaffrey's fault.
Buzzer heart.
You have, you apparently have other things going on now.
Science fiction, I assume science fiction works.
Would you want to share any of that with us?
What you're working on?
Yeah, I finished a book in October with a man who's been my best friend
since we were 12 years old, Ralph Mylis, called the Sarencennacles,
which has nothing to do with the series.
It has to do with Ralph spending three years in the desert in Saudi Arabia
and baking his brain and coming back and thinking he wanted to write
science fiction after 20 years as being a successful accountant.
And I'll have better sense in that and understanding the financial side of this world.
We wrote that in, took most of last year to write that.
I just finished the fourth book in the series, finished the next little
last draft right before I came here to AggieCon.
And I have a proposal in front of Bandim now for a new series called
the Double Spiral War, which is going to involve a lot of my experiences
in Vietnam, but also a lot of my reading on wars in general.
It's really a kind of, it's a 485,000 story about a war, but it breaks neatly
into five sections because of the scope of the war.
And it's a viewpoint on war that I wanted to use in telling a story
about a war that I really haven't seen done the way I wanted it to do.
And why, what the way I wanted it done.
So that's probably going to be my next project.
Is it going to be closer to forever war or build with Lactic Hero or Starship Troopers
or it's going to be something different?
Well, I hope it's going to be something different.
Just the first, the first chapter in the first book opens up with the leader
of the opposition, who by the end of that chapter has become a very sympathetic
character. I expect the readers to really like him because he is a very human
compassionate individual, but because of what happens to him and because personally
and politically. I mean, he ends up being the antagonist.
He's on the wrong side of the fence.
But part of what I want to do is to show that you can be on the wrong side of the
fence and be a good guy, quote unquote.
You can be a lovable, likable human being with all those positive traits we think
of in people and be on the wrong side in the wrong place and end up having to pay
for it. And so I'm starting that book from the viewpoint of this very likable
antagonist.
Okay, I'll ask you kind of a general question.
And you distributed books, whatever your job with Ballantyne was, what's the
future going to be like for the genre of science fiction next five or 10 years?
Books are getting pre-dammed expensive.
You don't just go in and save your pocket change, buy them anymore.
Is there going to be more, fewer big companies, but fewer companies controlling
all publishing? What is your outlook on it?
All right, excuse me.
I don't know.
I've been in the book business since 1969 and I've decided that the only constant
is change. And I've decided that if a rumor comes along about some change in the
industry, the more absurd the rumor, the better its chances of coming true.
It's extremely difficult industry to predict on a short term basis.
It looks to me like for a short term, we are going to have fewer companies,
fewer markets, more formula type science fiction, less science fiction that
stretches, that reaches out.
But I think that will change.
I don't think that's a permanent condition.
I think that's part of the temporary flux that the market is in.
I think we will see houses like Tor get stronger.
They are very financially stable.
They have done well with the books that they've done.
They will get stronger.
I think other smaller companies will in one way or another begin to fill the
vacuum that's been left by all this conglomeratization.
And that we will see again another expansion, whether it takes three years or
five years, I have no way of knowing.
But I think we'll see another expansion.
The thing that scares me is what you mentioned first, and that is the price of
the books.
I figured out when I was running a retail store about seven, eight years ago that
somewhere in the like 1990 that the average paperback book was going to cost
$10.97.
But then the average retail clerk at the same time was going to be make like
2250 an hour.
All right.
If assuming it's a certain level of inflation.
The question is, will we be able to overcome those same psychological barriers
that we overcame with gasoline and the rising price of bread?
I mean, I can remember buying bread for 10 cents a loaf and I can remember buying
gas for 17 cents a gallon.
Right.
Now, you know, we rejoice if we can get gas and then 91 cents, 89 cents and
everybody rushes to the corner for 89 cents a gallon gasoline and it'll go back
up to a dollar or something again.
And if we can overcome that psychological barrier of 10.97 for a paperback,
maybe, maybe we'll survive, but I don't know.
That's the part that scares me is the inflation prices as much as anything
else.
But I think what part of what we'll see is more and more of a shift over to the
trade paperbacks that they will take the place of most of the hard covers
because the hard covers will just get too expensive and people regardless of the
ratio, people will just be unwilling to pay hard cover prices.
So we'll see more trade paper.
We'll see more new books done in trade paper by lesser known authors that
might have been done in hard cover at one time by double day or Berkeley or
someone else.
And that may take some of the pressure off the market.
So trade paperbacks are here to stay?
I think so, yes.
I think I think the thing that will cinch it and I keep waiting for
publishers are not very progressive people, but I keep waiting for the
publishers to do and trade back, trade paper publishing what they did years and
years ago in mass market publishing.
And that is go to a standard size because what will cinch the market is when
they go to a standard trade size, the same way they did with a mass market size,
that means that all those places out there that you can put those books will
go to a standard size rack, which means they can be handled in the same way,
which means they can get much deeper into the distribution channels, which
means they'll get much wider distribution and better sales.
Right.
And until they do that, until the publishers finally beat their heads
against each other and are willing to settle on a size, they're going to limit
the saleability of those things.
But I think they will.
I think the market will demand that they do that.
And when they do, then we will see a new class.
We will have an a sense mass market trade books.
They will be bigger.
They'll be slightly better bound, maybe slightly better paper, bigger type
faces anyway, easier to read and they'll come in standard sizes and they'll show
up in racks to be a rack of mass market books and a rack of trade books.
And that's the direction I think they have to go.
You remember all the different sizes mass market books.
Yeah.
You know, if you're any collector knows, right, they, as a collector, I know you
said in one book that it looks like that's that may trade paperbacks may save
the industry, but as a collector, I hate you.
But if they're here, they're here.
I like it.
But yeah, I have, I have Larry Newman's, the magic goes away.
And it's, damn it's, I could barely get it on my shelf and then I've got some
little ones and there's all different sizes.
Well, if you look, even, even with the standardization of size on mass market
books, if you look at mass market books, they are different sizes, right?
Not widths, but heights, right?
Ban, even in the Bantam line, there are different heights.
And what they have started to do is they've knocked off like an eight or three
sixteenths of an inch from what was their standard height because they figured
if they, if they knocked off three sixteenths of an inch on each book and
they were doing a printing of 250,000 books that for the same amount of money,
they were getting like an extra 5,000 books out of the same roll of paper.
Now, paper's gotten extremely expensive, right?
So if you can get an extra 5,000 books out of that same roll of paper, right?
You've saved some money and it's, but it really messes up your shelf when you
have a series and they stair step along the shelf.
I have two copies of Bill DeGalactico, the first edition that Harry signed
yesterday and one of them is at least a quarter of an inch is not more higher.
I mean, they, it's the same edition of the same book, same printing.
Yeah.
And Ace Doubles, my Ace Doubles.
Kind of stair step like that too.
It's interesting.
Jagged Peaks.
Any questions, Mr. Carson?
Hmm.
No, no.
Well, maybe one.
You didn't ask me writing questions.
No, no mechanics thereof.
Just a few mechanics type questions.
Whenever you start to write something like the windhover, what came first?
Characters, plot, character with a problem.
That's, that's how most of my stories begin as character with a problem.
I write short stories that are unsayable because the characters have
problems that are either so bizarre or so obscene.
Or something else that even though the problem gets resolved by the end of the
story that no one's really interested, that's fine because I just write them for
fun.
They're characters who pop into my head with this particular problem and I let
them run through that section of their lives until they solve the problem and
then they go back in the drawer and I've gotten them out of my head, which is the
most important thing.
But I start with a character with a problem and very shortly thereafter, I
have two to three weeks for a novel length work.
I have a very good idea of how the story ends.
All right, so I have a beginning and an ending and the middle is just, it's like
standing.
I remember as a kid standing and the first time I went through Tennessee and
standing on one of those overlooks and looking out across to the mountains on
the other side and it was nothing but fog and mist in the bottom.
Well, that's kind of how I feel when I get ready to start a novel.
I know where I am and I know the mountain is on the other side, but what's in
the middle there?
I don't know, except you have to go down and you have to come back up in order
to get there.
And then that middle resolves itself in a very vague way as I begin the story.
And I found the more that I try to put my characters through paces in the
middle to do certain things, the less cooperative they become.
So what I try to do then is tap them back in the line when they start pushing
the plot too far away.
I think I'll never get to the end this way.
If you guys keep going left edge, little right, make me happy.
So I'd nudge them back to the right a little bit and then they head back
and then they go way off too far to the right and you have to nudge them back
to the left.
It's a strange process, especially when they come alive in the back of your
head and they start saying things and doing things that you didn't expect them
to do.
Sheryl's pregnancy is a perfect example of that.
I mean, she wasn't supposed to get pregnant for another six months in this
story because I had to get them where they were going first, right?
I was going to have her get pregnant someplace safe.
Oh, no, she had to get pregnant and she and Gerard had to argue about it.
And then I was angry at both of them.
And then I had to back off and take five pages out of the manuscript, say,
wait a minute, take them back to the beginning of that scene, say, it's your
problem, you work it out, I'll write it down.
You just tell me what's right now.
And so I let them argue at the problem and solve their difficulties and it was
all fine.
And I learned a valuable lesson.
Keep your cotton picking hands off their lives when they're doing it themselves.
When they're struggling with it themselves.
When you get your characters going, they become their own little entities.
Oh, yes.
They, when Ralph and I did our book, one of the things that happened was we had,
we started with a male protagonist and then a minor protagonist who was female.
And she came alive for me about the same time that he came alive for Ralph.
And so he was right.
Ralph was writing the first draft and he was putting words in her mouth.
And then when I was reading it and getting ready to write the second draft,
she was in the back of my head screaming.
No, no, no, I wouldn't say that.
I wouldn't, I wouldn't react like that.
So I'd get on the phone to Ralph and I'd say, Calissa says that she wouldn't
react like this.
And he said, well, we'll work it out tomorrow at our story conference.
And we'd sit there for eight hours trying to hash out dialogue between a
character who was alive in his head and a character who was alive in my head.
And he had to have enough sense of that to go back then and write first draft
material based on what I had told him about a character who was living in my
head.
The only thing that saved us was that some character didn't come alive that
way for both of us, right?
Who then would have been schizophrenic.
He'd have been alive one way and Ralph said it another way in my head.
We'd probably had to do something.
We'd have to divide him into two characters.
Bizarre, bizarre.
Interesting.
Yeah.
That's something that always ceases to amaze us.
We never ceases to always ceases.
Just the writing process and not being writers, but being extremely interested
in the process.
And we've heard time and time again how the characters just take over and
that's just that blows us away.
I can think of characters and I can think of stories and that's where it stops.